Old John of Gaunt,
time-honored Lancaster,
hast thou, according tothy oath and band,
brought hither HenryHereford, thy bold son,
here to make good theboisterous late appeal,
which then our leisurewould not let us hear,
against the duke ofNorfolk, Thomas Mowbray?
I have, my liege.
Tell me, moreover, hastthou sounded him
if he appeal the duke onancient malice,
or worthily, as a goodsubject should,
on some known ground oftreachery in him?
As near as I could sifthim on that argument,
on some apparent dangerseen in him aimed atYour Highness.
No inveterate malice.
Then call them to ourpresence.
Face to face and frowningbrow to brow,
ourselves will hear theaccuser and the accusedfreely speak.
High-stomached are theyboth and full of ire,
in rage deaf as the sea,hasty as fire.
Many years of happy daysbefall my gracious sovereign,
my most loving liege.
Each day still betterother's happiness
until the heavens, envyingearth's good hap,
add an immortal title toyour crown.
We thank you both.
Yet one but flatters us,as well appeareth by thecause you come,
namely to appeal eachother of high treason.
Cousin of Hereford, whatdost thou object
against the duke ofNorfolk, Thomas Mowbray?
First, heaven be therecord to my speech.
In the devotion of asubject's love,
tendering the precioussafety of my prince
and free from othermisbegotten hate,
come I appellant to thisprincely presence.
Now, Thomas Mowbray, do Iturn to thee,
and mark my greeting well,
for what I speak my body shallmake good upon this earth
or my divine soul answerit in heaven.
Thou art a traitor and amiscreant,
too good to be so and toobad to live,
since the more fair andcrystal is the sky,
the uglier seem the cloudsthat in it fly.
Once more, the more toaggravate the note,
with a foul traitor's namestuff I thy throat
and wish, so please mysovereign, ere I move,
what my tongue speaks myright drawn sword may prove.
Let not my cold words hereaccuse my zeal.
'Tis not the trial of awoman's war.
The bitter clamor of twoeager tongues
can arbitrate this causebetwixt us twain.
The blood is hot that mustbe cooled for this,
yet can I not of such tamepatience boast
as to be hushed and naughtat all to say.
First, the fair reverenceof Your Highness curbs me
from giving reins andspurs to my free speech,
which else would postuntil it had returned
these terms of treasondoubled down his throat.
Setting aside his highblood's royalty
and let him be no kinsmanto my liege,
I do defy him, and I spitat him,
call him a slanderouscoward and a villain,
which to maintain I wouldallow him odds and meet him
were I tied to run afooteven to the frozen ridgesof the Alps
or any other groundinhabitable,
wherever Englishman durstset his foot.
Meantime let this defendmy loyalty.
By all my hopes, mostfalsely doth he lie.
Pale, trembling coward,
there I throw my gage,
disclaiming here thekindred of the king,
and lay aside my highblood's royalty,
which fear, not reverence,makes thee to except.
If guilty dread have leftthee so much strength
as to take up minehonor's pawn,
then stoop.
By that and all the ritesof knighthood else
will I make good againstthee,
arm to arm, what I havespoke,
or thou canst worsedevise.
I take it up, and by thatsword
I swear which gently laid myknighthood on my shoulder,
I'll answer thee in anyfair degree
or chivalrous design ofknightly trial.
And when I mount, alivemay I not light
if I be traitor orunjustly fight.
What doth our cousin layto Mowbray's charge?
It must be great that caninherit us so much
as of a thought of ill inhim.
Look what I speak.
My life shall prove ittrue
that Mowbray hath received8,000 nobles
in name of lendings forYour Highness' soldiers,
the which he hath detainedfor lewd employments
like a false traitor andinjurious villain.
Besides I say and will inbattle prove or here orelsewhere
to the furthest verge thatever was surveyed byEnglish eye,
that all the treasons forthese 18 years
complotted and contrivedin this land
fetch from false Mowbraytheir first head and spring.
Further I say and furtherwill maintain
upon his bad life to makeall this good,
that he did plot the dukeof Gloucester's death,
suggest his soon-believingadversaries,
and consequently, like atraitor coward,
sluiced out his innocentsoul with streams of blood,
which blood, likesacrificing Abel's,
cries even from the tonguelesscaverns of the earth
to me for justice andrough chastisement.
And, by the glorious worthof my descent,
this arm shall do it orthis life be spent.
How high a pitch hisresolution soars.
Thomas of Norfolk, whatsay'st thou to this?
Oh, let my sovereign turnaway his face
and let his ears a littlewhile be deaf
till I have told thisslander of his blood
how God and good men hateso foul a liar.
Mowbray, impartial are oureyes and ears
were he my brother-- nay,my kingdom's heir.
As he is but my father'sbrother's son,
now, by my scepter's awe,I make a vow.
Such neighbor nearness toour sacred blood
should nothing privilegehim
nor partialize theunstooping firmness of myupright soul.
He is our subject,Mowbray.
So art thou.
Free speech and fearless Ito thee allow.
Then, Bolingbroke, as lowas to thy heart,
through the false passageof thy throat, thou liest.
Three parts of thatreceipt I had for Calais
disbursed I duly to HisHighness' soldiers.
The other part reserved Iby consent,
for that my sovereignliege
was in my debt uponremainder of a dear account,
since last I went toFrance to fetch his queen.
Now swallow down that lie.
For Gloucester's death, Islew him not,
but to my own disgraceneglected my sworn duty inthat case.
For you, my noble lord ofLancaster,
the honorable father to myfoe,
once did I lay an ambushfor your life,
a trespass that doth vexmy grieved soul.
But ere I last receivedthe sacrament, I didconfess it
and exactly begged YourGrace's pardon,
and I hope I had it.
This is my fault.
As for the rest appealed,
it issues from the rancorof a villain,
a recreant and mostdegenerate traitor,
which in myself I boldlywill defend
and interchangeably hurldown my gage
upon this overweeningtraitor's foot
to prove myself a loyalgentleman
even in the best bloodchambered in his bosom.
In haste whereof,
most heartily I pray YourHighness
to assign our trial day.
Wrath-kindled gentlemen,be ruled by me.
Let's purge this cholerwithout letting blood.
This we prescribe, thoughno physician.
Deep malice makes too deepincision.
Forget, forgive, conclude,and be agreed.
Our doctors say this is nomonth to bleed.
Good Uncle, let this endwhere it begun.
We'll calm the duke ofNorfolk, you your son.
To be a make-peace shallbecome my age.
Throw down, my son, theduke of Norfolk's gage.
And, Norfolk, throwdown his.
When, Harry, when?
Obedience bids I shouldnot bid again.
Norfolk, throw down, webid.
There is no boot.
Myself I throw, dreadsovereign, at thy foot.
My life thou shaltcommand, but not my shame.
The one my duty owes,
but my fair name,
despite of death thatlives upon my grave,
to dark dishonor's usethou shalt not have.
I am disgraced, impeached,and baffled here,
pierced to the soul withslander's venomed spear,
the which no balm can cure
but his heart blood whichbreathed this poison.
Rage must be withstood.
Give me his gage.
Lions make leopards tame.
Yea, but not change hisspots.
Take but my shame and Iresign my gage.
My dear, dear lord,
the purest treasure mortaltimes afford is spotlessreputation.
That away, men are butgilded loam or painted clay.
A jewel in a ten-timesbarred up chest
is a bold spirit in aloyal breast.
Mine honor is my life.
Both grow in one.
Take honor from me, and mylife is done.
Then, dear my liege, minehonor let me try.
In that I live, and forthat will I die.
Cousin, throw up yourgage.
Do you begin.
Oh, God, defend my soulfrom such deep sin.
Shall I seem crestfallenin my father's sight?
Or with pale beggar fearimpeach my height
before this outdareddastard?
Ere my tongue shall wound myhonor with such feeble wrong
or sound so base a parle,
my teeth shall tear theslavish motive ofrecanting fear
and spit it bleeding inhis high disgrace,
where shame doth harbor,even in Mowbray's face.
We were not born to suebut to command.
Since which we cannot doto make you friends,
be ready, as your livesshall answer it,
at Coventry upon SaintLambert's day.
There shall your swordsand lances arbitrate
the swelling difference ofyour settled hate.
Since we can not atoneyou,
we shall see justice designthe victor's chivalry.
Lord marshal, command ourofficers at arms.
Be ready to direct thesehome alarms.
Alas, the part I had inGloucester's blood
doth more solicit me thanyour exclaims
to stir against thebutchers of his life.
But since correction lieth
in those hands which madethe fault which we cannotcorrect,
put we our quarrel to thewill of heaven,
who, when they see thehours ripe on earth,
will rain hot vengeance onoffenders' heads.
Finds brotherhood in theeno sharper spur?
Hath love in thy old bloodno living fire?
Edward's seven sons,whereof thyself art one,
were as seven vials of hissacred blood
or seven fair branchesspringing from one root.
Some of those seven aredried by nature's course,
some of those branches bythe destinies cut.
But Thomas, my dear lord,my life, my Gloucester,
one vial full of Edward'ssacred blood,
one flourishing branch ofhis most royal root,
is cracked,
and all the precious liquorspilt is hacked down
and his summer leaves allfaded
by envy's hand andmurder's bloody axe.
Ah, Gaunt,
his blood was thine.
That bed, that womb, thatmetal, that self-mold
that fashioned thee madehim a man.
And though thou livest andbreathest,
yet art thou slain in him.
Thou dost consent in somelarge measure to thyfather's death
in that thou seest thywretched brother die,
who was the model of thyfather's life.
Call it not patience,Gaunt.
It is despair.
In suffering thus thybrother to be slaughtered,
thou showest the nakedpathway to thy life,
teaching stern murder howto butcher thee.
That which in mean men weentitle patience
is pale cold cowardice innoble breasts.
What shall I say?
To safeguard thine ownlife,
the best way is to vengemy Gloucester's death.
God's is the quarrel,
for God's substitute, hisdeputy anointed in Hissight,
hath caused his death,
the which if wrongfully,let heaven revenge,
for I may never lift anangry arm against Hisminister.
Where then, alas, may Icomplain myself?
To God, the widow'schampion and defense.
Why, then, I will.
Farewell, old Gaunt.
Thou goest to Coventry,
there to behold ourcousin Hereford and fellMowbray fight.
Oh, sit my husband'swrongs on Hereford's spear
that they may enterbutcher Mowbray's breast.
Or, if misfortune miss thefirst career,
be Mowbray's sins so heavyin his bosom
that they may break hisfoaming courser's back
and throw the riderheadlong in the lists,
a caitiff recreant to mycousin Hereford.
Farewell, old Gaunt.
Thy sometimes brother'swife
with her companion griefmust end her life.
Sister, farewell.
I must to Coventry.
As much good stay withthee as go with me.
Yet one word more.
Grief boundeth where itfalls
not with the emptyhollowness but weight.
I take my leave before Ihave begun,
for sorrow ends not whenit seemeth done.
Commend me to thy brother,Edmund York.
Lo, this is all.
Nay, yet depart not so.
Though this be all, do notso quickly go.
I shall remember more.
Bid him--
ah, what?
With all good speed atPlashy visit me.
Alack, and what shall goodold York there see
but empty lodgings andunfurnished walls,
unpeopled offices,untrodden stones?
And what hear there forwelcome but my groans?
Therefore commend me.
Let him not come there
to seek out sorrow thatdwells everywhere.
Desolate, desolate, will Ihence and die.
The last leave of theetakes my weeping eye.
My Lord Aumerle, is HarryHereford armed?
Yea, at all points andlongs to enter in.
The duke of Norfolk,sprightfully and bold,
stays but the summons ofthe appellant's trumpet.
Why, then, the championsare prepared
and stay for nothing butHis Majesty's approach.
Marshal, demand of yonderchampion
the cause of his arrivalhere in arms.
Ask him his name
and orderly proceed toswear him in the justiceof his cause.
In God's name and theking's,
say who thou art
and why thou comest thusknightly clad in arms,
against what man thoucomest,
and what thy quarrel.
Speak truly on thyknighthood and thy oath,
and so defend thee heavenand thy valor.
My name is Thomas Mowbray,duke of Norfolk,
who hither come engaged bymy oath--
which God defend a knightshould violate--
both to defend my loyaltyand truth
to God, my king, and mysucceeding issue
against the duke ofHereford that appeals me,
and, by the grace of Godand this mine arm, toprove him,
in defending of myself,
a traitor to my God, myking, and me.
And as I truly fight,defend me heaven.
Marshal, demand of yonderknight in arms both who he is
and why he cometh hither thusplated in habiliments of war,
and formally, according toour law,
depose him in the justiceof his cause.
What is thy name, andwherefore comest thou hither
before King Richard in hisroyal lists?
Against whom comest thou,and what's thy quarrel?
Speak like a true knight,so defend thee heaven.
Harry of Hereford,Lancaster, and Derby am I,
who ready here do stand inarms
to prove, by God's graceand my body's valor,
in lists on ThomasMowbray, duke of Norfolk,
that he is a traitor, fouland dangerous,
to God of heaven, KingRichard, and to me.
And as I fight, defend meheaven.
On pain of death,
no person be so bold ordaring-hardy
as to touch the lists
except the marshal andsuch officers appointed
to direct these fairdesigns.
Lord marshal,
let me kiss my sovereign'shand
and bow my knee before HisMajesty,
for Mowbray and myself
are like two men that vowa long and wearypilgrimage.
Then let us take aceremonious leave
and loving farewell of ourseveral friends.
The appellant in all dutygreets Your Highness
and craves to kiss yourhand and take his leave.
We will descend and foldhim in our arms.
Cousin of Hereford, as thycause is right,
so be thy fortune in thisroyal fight.
Farewell, my blood, whichif today thou shed,
lament we may, but notrevenge thee dead.
Oh, let no noble eyeprofane a tear for me
if I be gored withMowbray's spear.
As confident as is thefalcon's flight against a bird
do I with Mowbray fight.
My loving lord, I take myleave of you;
of you, my noble cousin,Lord Aumerle.
Not sick, although I haveto do with death,
but lusty, young, andcheerly drawing breath.
Lo, as at English feasts,
so I regreet the daintiestlast to make the end mostsweet.
Oh, thou, the earthlyauthor of my blood,
whose youthful spirit inme regenerate,
doth with a twofold vigorlift me up
to reach at victory abovemy head.
Add proof unto mine armorwith thy prayers,
and with thy blessingssteel my lance's point
that it may enterMowbray's waxen coat
and furbish new the nameof John a Gaunt,
even in the lusty haviorof his son.
God in thy good cause makethee prosperous.
Be swift like lightning inthe execution
and let thy blows, doublyredoubled,
fall like amazing thunder
on the casque of thyadverse pernicious enemy.
Rouse up thy youthfulblood.
Be valiant, and live.
Mine innocency and SaintGeorge to thrive.
However God or fortune castmy lot, there lives or dies,
true to King Richard'sthrone,
a loyal, just, and uprightgentleman.
Never did captive with afreer heart
cast off his chains ofbondage
and embrace his goldenuncontrolled enfranchisement
more than my dancing souldoth celebrate
this feast of battle withmine adversary.
Most mighty liege and mycompanion peers,
take from my mouth thewish of happy years.
As gentle and as jocund asto jest go I to fight.
Truth hath a quiet breast.
Farewell, my lord.
Securely I espy virtuewith valor couched inthine eye.
Order the trial, marshal,and begin.
Harry of Hereford,Lancaster, and Derby,
receive thy lance and Goddefend the right.
Strong as a tower in hope,I cry amen.
Go bear this lance toThomas, duke of Norfolk.
Herald Harry of Hereford,Lancaster, and Derby
stands here for God, hissovereign, and himself,
on pain to be found falseand recreant,
to prove the duke ofNorfolk, Thomas Mowbray
a traitor to his God, hisking, and him,
and dares him to setforward to the fight.
Here standeth ThomasMowbray, duke of Norfolk,
on pain to be found falseand recreant,
both to defend himself
and to approve Henry ofHereford, Lancaster, and Derby
to God, his sovereign, andto him disloyal,
courageously and with afree desire,
attending but the signalto begin.
Sound trumpets and setforward, combatants.
Stay!
The king hath thrown hiswarder down.
Let them lay by theirhelmets and their spears
and both return back totheir chairs again.
Withdraw with us.
And let the trumpets sound
while we return thesedukes what we decree.
Draw near
and list what with ourcouncil we have done.
For that our kingdom'searth should not be soiled
with that dear blood whichit hath fostered,
and for our eyes do hatethe dire aspect
of civil wounds ploughedup with neighbors' sword,
and for we think the eaglewinged pride
of sky aspiring andambitious thoughts,
with rival hating envy, seton you to wake our peace--
which in our country'scradle
draws the sweet infantbreath of gentle sleep--
which so roused up withboisterous, untuned drums,
with harsh resoundingtrumpets' dreadful bray
and grating shock ofwrathful iron arms,
might from our quietconfines fright fair peace
and make us wade even inour kindred's blood.
Therefore, we banish youour territories.
You, cousin Hereford, uponpain of life,
till twice five summershave enriched our fields
shall not regreet our fairdominions
but tread the strangerpaths of banishment.
Thy will be done.
This must my comfort be:
that sun that warms youhere shall shine on me,
and those his golden beamsto you here lent
shall point on me and gildmy banishment.
Norfolk, for thee remainsa heavier doom,
which I with someunwillingness pronounce.
The sly, slow hours shallnot determinate
the dateless limit of thydear exile.
The hopeless word of"never to return"
breathe I against thee,upon pain of life.
A heavy sentence, my mostsovereign liege,
and all unlooked for fromYour Highness' mouth.
A dearer merit,
not so deep a maim as tobe cast forth in thecommon air,
have I deserved at YourHighness' hands.
The language I havelearned these 40 years,
my native English, now Imust forego.
And now my tongue's use
is to me no more than anunstringed viol or a harp
or like a cunninginstrument cased up or,being open,
put into his hands thatknows no touch to tune theharmony.
Within my mouth you haveenjailed my tongue,
doubly portcullised withmy teeth and lips,
and dull, unfeeling,barren ignorance
is made my jailer toattend on me.
I am too old to fawn upona nurse,
too far in years to be apupil now.
What is thy sentence thenbut speechless death,
which robs my tongue frombreathing native breath?
It boots thee not to becompassionate.
After our sentence,plaining comes too late.
Then thus I turn me frommy country's light
to dwell in solemn shadesof endless night.
Return again,
and take an oath withthee.
Lay on our royal swordyour banished hands.
Swear by the duty that youowe to God--
our part therein we banishwith yourselves--
to keep the oath that weadminister.
You never shall, so helpyou truth and God,
embrace each other's lovein banishment;
nor never look upon eachother's face;
nor never write, regreet,nor reconcile
this louring tempest ofyour homebred hate;
nor never by advisedpurpose meet
to plot, contrive, orcomplot any ill
against us, our state, oursubjects, or our land.
I swear.
And I, to keep all this.
Norfolk, so far as to mineenemy,
by this time, had the kingpermitted us,
one of our souls hadwandered in the air,
banished this frailsepulcher of our flesh,
as now our flesh isbanished from this land.
Confess thy treasons erethou fly the realm.
Since thou hast far to go,
bear not along theclogging burthen of aguilty soul.
No, Bolingbroke.
If ever I were traitor,
my name be blotted fromthe book of life,
and I from heaven banishedas from hence.
But what thou art, God,thou, and I do know.
And all too soon, I fear,the king shall rue.
Farewell, my liege.
Now no way can I stray.
Save back to England, allthe world's my way.
Uncle, even in the glassesof thine eyes
I see thy grieved heart.
Thy sad aspect hath from thenumber of his banished years
plucked four away.
Six frozen winter spent,
return with welcome homefrom banishment.
How long a time lies inone little word.
Four lagging winters and fourwanton springs end in a word.
Such is the breath ofkings.
I thank my liege that, inregard of me,
he shortens four years ofmy son's exile.
But little vantage will Igain thereby,
for, ere the six yearsthat he has to spend
shall change their moons andbring their times about,
my oil dried lamp and timebewasted light
shall be extinct with ageand endless nights.
My inch of taper will beburnt and done,
and blindfold death notlet me see my son.
Why, Uncle, thou hast manyyears to live.
But not a minute, King,that thou canst give.
Shorten my days thou canstwith sullen sorrow
and pluck nights from me,
but not lend a morrow.
Thou canst help time tofurrow me with age,
but stop no wrinkle of hispilgrimage.
Thy word is current withhim for my deaths.
But dead, thy kingdomcannot buy my breath.
Thy son is banished upongood advice,
whereto thy tongue a partyverdict gave.
Why at our justice seem'stthou then to lour?
Things sweet to tasteprove in digestion sour.
You urged me as a judge,
but I had rather that you hadbid me argue like a father.
Oh, had it been astranger, not my child,
to smooth his fault Iwould have been more mild.
Alas, I looked when someof you should say,
I was too strict to makemine own away.
But you gave leave to myunwilling tongue
against my will to domyself this wrong.
Cousin, farewell.
And, Uncle, bid him so.
Six years we banish him,and he shall go.
Cousin, farewell.
What presence must notknow,
from where you do remainlet paper show.
My lord, no leave take I,
for I will ride, as far as landwill let me, by your side.
Oh, to what purpose dostthou hoard thy words
that thou return'st nogreeting to thy friends?
I have too few to take myleave of you,
when the tongue's officeshould be prodigal
to breathe the abundantdolor of the heart.
Thy grief is but thyabsence for a time.
Joy absent.
Grief is present for thattime.
What are six winters?
They are quickly gone.
To men in joy.
But grief makes one hourten.
Call it a travel that thoutakest for pleasure.
My heart will sigh when Imiscall it so,
which finds it an enforcedpilgrimage.
The sullen passage of thyweary steps esteem as foil
wherein thou art to set
the precious jewel of thyhome return.
Nay.
Rather, every tediousstride I make will butremember me
what a deal of world Iwander from the jewelsthat I love.
Must I not serve
a long apprenticehood toforeign passages,
and in the end, having myfreedom,
boast of nothing else but thatI was a journeyman to grief?
All places that the eye ofheaven visits
are to a wise man portsand happy havens.
Teach thy necessity toreason thus.
There is no virtue likenecessity.
Think not the king did banishthee, but thou the king.
Woe doth the heavier sit
when it perceives it isbut faintly borne.
Go, say I sent thee forthto purchase honor
and not that the kingexiled thee.
Or suppose devouringpestilence hangs in our air,
and thou art flying to afresher clime.
Look what thy soul holdsdear.
Imagine it to lie that waythou go'st, not whencethou comest.
Suppose the singing birdsmusicians,
the grass whereon thoutread'st the presence strewn,
the flowers fair ladies,
and thy steps no more than adelightful measure or a dance.
For gnarling sorrow hathless power
to bite the man that mocksat it and sets it light.
Oh, who can hold a fire inhis hand
by thinking on the frostyCaucasus?
Or cloy the hungry edge ofappetite
by bare imagination of afeast?
Or wallow naked inDecember snow
by thinking on fantasticsummer's heat?
Oh, no.
The apprehension of thegood
gives but the greaterfeeling to the worse.
Fell sorrow's tooth dothnever rankle more
than when he bites butlanceth not the sore.
Come, come, my son.
I'll bring thee on thyway.
Had I thy youth and cause,I would not stay.
Then, England's ground,farewell.
Sweet soil, adieu,
my mother and my nursethat bears me yet.
Where'er I wander, boastof this I can:
though banished, yet atrueborn Englishman.
We did observe.
Cousin Aumerle, how farbrought you high Herefordon his way?
I brought high Hereford,if you call him so,
but to the next highway,
and there I left him.
And say, what store ofparting tears were shed?
Faith, none for me,
except the northeast wind,
which then blew bitterlyagainst our faces,
awaked the sleeping rheum,
and so by chance did grace ourhollow parting with a tear.
What said our cousin whenyou parted from him?
"Farewell."
And, for my heartdisdained
that my tongue should soprofane the word,
that taught me craft
to counterfeit oppressionof such grief
that words seemed buriedin my sorrow's grave.
Marry, would the word"farewell"
have lengthened hours andadded years to his shortbanishment,
he should have had avolume of farewells.
But since it would not, hehad none of me.
He is our cousin, cousin.
But 'tis doubt, when timeshall call him home frombanishment,
whether our kinsman cometo see his friends.
Ourself and Bushy, Bagothere and Green
observed his courtship tothe common people,
how he did seem to diveinto their hearts
with humble and familiarcourtesy.
What reverence he didthrow away on slaves,
wooing poor craftsmen withthe craft of smiles
and patient underbearingof his fortune,
as 'twere to banish theiraffects with him.
Off goes his bonnet to anoyster wench.
A brace of draymen bid Godspeed him well
and had the tribute of hissupple knee,
with "Thanks, my countrymen,my loving friends,"
as were our England inreversion his,
and he our subjects' nextdegree in hope.
Well, he's gone, and withhim go these thoughts.
Now, for the rebels whichstand out in Ireland,
expedient manage must bemade, my liege,
ere further leisure yieldthem further means
for their advantage andYour Highness' loss.
We will ourself in personto this war.
And, for our coffers,
with too great a court andliberal largess,
are grown somewhat light.
We are enforced to farmour royal realm.
The revenue whereof shallfurnish us
for our affairs in hand.
If that come short,
our substitutes at homeshall have blank charters.
Whereto, when they shallknow what men are rich,
they shall subscribe themfor large sums of gold
and send them after tosupply our wants,
for we will make forIreland presently.
Bushy, what news?
Old John of Gaunt isgrievous sick, my lord,suddenly taken,
and hath sent post haste
to entreat Your Majesty tovisit him.
Where lies he?
At Ely House.
Now put it, God, in thephysician's mind
to help him to his graveimmediately.
The lining of his coffersshall make coats
to deck our soldiers forthese Irish wars.
Come, gentlemen, let's allgo visit him.
Pray God, we may makehaste
and come too late.
Amen.
Will the king come
that I may breathe my lastin wholesome counsel
to his unstaid youth?
Vex not yourself
nor strive not with yourbreath,
for all in vain comescounsel to his ear.
Oh, but they say thetongues of dying men
enforce attention likedeep harmony.
When words are scarce, theyare seldom spent in vain,
for they breathe truththat breathe their wordsin pain.
He that no more must sayis listened more
than they whom youth andease have taught to glose.
More are men's ends markedthan their lives before.
The setting sun and musicat the close,
as the last taste ofsweets, is sweetest last,
writ in remembrance morethan things long past.
Though Richard my life'scounsel would not hear,
my death's sad tale mayyet undeaf his ear.
No, for it is stopped withother flattering sounds,
as praises of whose tastethe wise are fond;
lascivious meters, towhose venom sound
the open ear of youth dothalways listen.
Reports of fashions inproud Italy,
whose manners still our tardy,apish nation limps after
in base imitation.
Where doth the worldthrust forth a vanity--
so it be new, there's norespect how vile--
that is not quickly buzzedinto his ears?
Then all too late comescounsel to be heard,
where will doth mutinywith wit's regard.
Direct not him whose wayhimself will choose.
'Tis breath thou lack'st, andthat breath wilt thou lose.
Methinks I am a prophetnew inspired
and thus expiring doforetell of him.
His rash fierce blaze ofriot cannot last,
for violent fires soonburn out themselves.
Small showers last long, butsudden storms are short.
He tires betimes thatspurs too fast betimes.
With eager feeding fooddoth choke the feeder.
Light vanity, insatiatecormorant, consuming means
soon preys upon itself.
This royal throne ofkings;
this sceptered isle;
this earth of majesty;
this seat of Mars;
this other Eden;demi-paradise;
this fortress built bynature for herself
against infection and thehand of war;
this happy breed of men;
this little world;
this precious stone set inthe silver sea,
which serves it in theoffice of a wall
or as a moat defensive toone house
against the envy of lesshappier lands;
this blessed plot; thisearth;
this realm; this England;
this nurse;
this teeming womb of royalkings,
feared by their breed andfamous by their birth,
renowned for their deedsas far from home
for Christian service andtrue chivalry
as is the sepulcher instubborn Jewry
of the world's ransom;
blessed Mary's Son;
this land of such dearsouls;
this dear, dear land--
dear for her reputationthrough the world--
is now leased out--
I die pronouncing it--
like to a tenement orpelting farm.
England, bound in with thetriumphant sea
whose rocky shore beatsback the envious siege ofwatery Neptune,
is now bound in withshame,
with inky blots and rottenparchment bonds.
That England that was wontto conquer others
hath made a shamefulconquest of itself.
Ah, would the scandalvanish with my life,
how happy then were myensuing death.
The king is come.
Deal mildly with hisyouth,
for young, hot colts beingraged do rage the more.
How fares our noble UncleLancaster?
What comfort, man?
How is't with aged Gaunt?
Oh, how that name befitsmy composition.
Old Gaunt indeed, andgaunt in being old.
Within me grief has kept atedious fast.
And who abstains from meatthat is not gaunt?
For sleeping England longtime have I watched.
Watching breeds leanness.
Leanness is all gaunt.
The pleasure that somefathers feed upon is mystrict fast.
I mean my children'slooks.
And therein fasting hastthou made me gaunt.
Gaunt am I for the grave,gaunt as a grave,
whose hollow womb inheritsnaught but bones.
Can sick men play sonicely with their names?
No, misery makes sport tomock itself.
Since thou dost seek tokill my name in me,
I mock my name, greatKing, to flatter thee.
Should dying men flatterwith those that live?
No, men living flatterthose that die.
Thou, now a-dying, say'stthou flatterest me.
Oh, no, thou diest, thoughI the sicker be.
I am in health.
I breathe and see thee ill.
Now He that made me knowsI see thee ill,
ill in myself to see andin thee seeing ill.
Thy deathbed is no lesserthan thy land
wherein thou liest inreputation sick.
And thou, too carelesspatient as thou art,
commit'st thy anointedbody
to the cure of thosephysicians that firstwounded thee.
A thousand flatterers sitwithin thy crown,
whose compass is no biggerthan thy head.
And yet, encaged in sosmall a verge,
the waste is no whitlesser than thy land.
Oh, had thy grandsire witha prophet's eye
seen how his son's sonshould destroy his sons,
from forth thy reach hewould have laid thy shame,
deposing thee before thouwert possessed,
which art possessed now todepose thyself.
Why, cousin, wert thouregent of the world,
it were a shame to letthis land by lease.
And for thy world enjoyingbut this land,
is it not more than shameto shame it so?
Landlord of England artthou now,
not king.
Thy state of law isbondslave to the law.
And thou--
A lunatic, lean-wittedfool,
presuming on an ague'sprivilege,
darest with thy frozenadmonition make pale ourcheek,
chasing the royal bloodwith fury
from his native residence.
Now, by my seat's rightroyal majesty,
wert thou not brother togreat Edward's son,
this tongue that runs soroundly in thy head
should run thy head fromthy unreverent shoulders.
Oh, spare me not, mybrother Edward's son.
For that I was his fatherEdward's son.
That blood already, likethe pelican,
hast thou tapped out anddrunkenly caroused.
My brother Gloucester,plain well-meaning soul,
whom fair befall in heavenamongst happy souls,
may be a precedent andwitness good
that thou respect'st notspilling Edward's blood.
Joined with the presentsickness that I have,
and thy unkindness be likecrooked age
to crop at once a too longwithered flower.
Live in thy shame,
but die not shamewith thee.
These words hereafter thytormentors be.
Convey me to my bed, thento my grave.
Love they to live thatlove and honor have.
And let them die that ageand sullens have,
for both hast thou, andboth become the grave.
I do beseech Your Majesty.
Impute his words to waywardsickliness and age in him.
He loves you, on my life,
and holds you dear asHarry, duke of Hereford,
were he here.
Right, you say true.
As Hereford's love, sohis.
As theirs, so mine.
And all be as it is.
My liege, old Gauntcommends him to YourMajesty.
What says he?
Nay, nothing.
All is said.
His tongue is now astringless instrument.
Words, life, and all, oldLancaster hath spent.
Be York the next that mustbe bankrupt so.
Though death be poor, itends a mortal woe.
The ripest fruit firstfalls,
and so doth he.
His time is spent.
Our pilgrimage must be.
So much for that.
Now for our Irish wars.
We must supplant thoserough, rugheaded kerns,
which live like venom
where no venom else but onlythey have privilege to live.
And for these great affairsdo ask some charge.
Towards our assistance wedo seize to us
the plate, coin, revenues,and moveables
whereof our Uncle Gauntdid stand possessed.
How long must I bepatient?
Ah, how long shall tenderduty make me suffer wrong?
Not Gloucester's death,
nor Hereford's banishment,not Gaunt's rebukes,
nor England's privatewrongs,
nor the prevention of poorBolingbroke about hismarriage,
nor my own disgrace,
have ever made me sour mypatient cheek
or bend one wrinkle on mysovereign's face.
I am the last of nobleEdward's sons,
of whom thy father, princeof Wales, was first.
In war was never lionraged more fierce,
in peace was never gentlelamb more mild,
than was that young andprincely gentleman.
His face thou hast,
for even so looked he,
accomplished with thenumber of thy hours.
But when he frowned,
it was against the Frenchand not against his friends.
His noble hand did winwhat he did spend
and spent not that
which his triumphantfather's hand had won.
His hands were guilty ofno kindred blood,
but bloody with theenemies of his kin.
Oh, Richard.
York is too far gone withgrief,
or else he never wouldcompare between.
Why, Uncle, what's thematter?
Oh, my liege.
Pardon me, if you please.
If not, I, pleased not tobe pardoned,
am content withal.
Seek you to seize andgripe into your hands
the royalties and rightsof banished Hereford?
Is not Gaunt dead,
and doth not Herefordlive?
Was not Gaunt just, and isnot Harry true?
Did not the one deserve tohave an heir?
Is not his heir awell-deserving son?
Take Hereford's rightsaway
and take from time his chartersand his customary rights,
let not tomorrow thenensue today,
be not thyself.
For how art thou a kingbut by fair sequence andsuccession?
Now, afore God-- Godforbid I say true--
if you do wrongfully seizeHereford's rights,
call in the letters patentthat he hath
by his attorneys generalto sue his livery,
and deny his offeredhomage,
you pluck a thousanddangers on your head.
You lose a thousandwell-disposed hearts
and prick my tenderpatience
to such thoughts as honorand allegiance cannot think.
Think what you will.
We seize into our hands
his plate, his goods, hismoney, and his lands.
I'll not be by the while.
My liege, farewell.
What will ensue hereof,there's none can tell.
But by bad courses may beunderstood
that their events cannever fall out good.
Go, Bushy, to the earl ofWiltshire straight.
Bid him repair to us to ElyHouse to see this business.
Tomorrow next we will forIreland,
and 'tis time, I trow.
And we create, in absenceof ourself,
our Uncle York lordgovernor of England,
for he is just and alwaysloved us well.
Come on, our queen.
Tomorrow must we part.
Be merry,
for our time of stay isshort.